Testing. This is an interview with Dr. John H.
Milleth.
Today's date is February 25th, 1980.
This is an interview with the veterinarian
project and this is Terry Anderson. This is a test.
This is an interview with Dr. John Milleth on
February 25, 1980. This is Terry Anderson. Could
you tell us where and when you were born? I was born
in Batesville, Arkansas in 1903.
Can you tell us about your parents, their
occupation? Well,
my father was born in Bowling Green, Kentucky.
His father was from Ireland. Came over here at the
time of the potato famine in Ireland. In the 1840s.
1840s. And settled in Kentucky, married there,
and had the, well, he was married twice. He had a
larger family with the first marriage, and then
with the second marriage, my father had only the
one child. After my father was born, I don't
believe that his father lived very much longer
after that. But dad had to begin work at an early
age. So he missed out on his schooling. He began as a
water boy and just sort of worked his way up. He was
with the US engineers on river work on Green River
in Kentucky. Then in later years, he was down in
Arkansas, where I was born, putting in a lock and
dam on White River. Oh, really? Yeah. Is this part
of the Bull Shoals? I don't know. I've never been
back. So it wasn't too far from Batesville,
because we lived in Batesville, and he went back
and forth. In the Ozarks, yeah. Yeah. and from
there he was transferred back to Kentucky to do
some work on Green River and then from there to
Texas to work on the Brazos River cleaning out
overhanging timbers and blasting out log jams and
what have you. This was down around San Philippi
and Seeley. We lived in Seeley at the time, Seeley,
Texas. And when that was completed we were
transferred to Navasota, Texas. And he put in the
Lock and Dam in the Brazos out from Navasota. He was
the superintendent of construction by that time.
But even though he had never been to school a day in
his life, he learned from the engineers who were on
the job. He studied their books and so on.
His job actually was to handle men. And he knew how
to handle men. So from Navasota, where I began
school in 1910, we were transferred to Ferris,
Texas. He had some repair work to do on the locking
dam out from Ferris in the Trinity River. And from
there down to Crockett. to put in a locking dam in
the Trinity River at Hurricane Shoal. He was
transferred after that to Port Arthur, Texas, to
put in a locking dam there to keep the salt water off
the rice farms. And this was about 1917. And my
mother died that year. And he gave up this work with
the US engineers. and began a farming life.
Really? Yeah. He said he'd had enough moving
around, and we had moved with him everywhere he
went. Mother was tired of moving, too, and that's
the reason we settled in Crockett. She said she
wasn't going to move anymore. And he went to Port
Arthur by himself and would come home at Christmas
and so on, any other vacation time he had. She died
that year, 1917. But tell me about her. She was an
old Kentucky girl. Her name was Bobbitt,
B-O-B-B-I-T-T,
Rosella Bobbitt. I don't know much of her family.
Of course, I was supposed to have seen them when we
went from Arkansas back to Kentucky, but I was too
young to remember anything about it. I've never
kept up with her side of the family. I don't know,
she had some sisters, she had some brothers and so
on, but whatever became of them, I don't know. What
did she die of? She had peritonitis. It was
actually a miscarriage. Oh, that's stupid. And
developed peritonitis from that. So,
we went down on the farm with dad. They were four
boys and one girl. And with my grandmother, that
was my father's mother, she was with us. And so this
was an extensive farming project down there. They
had about 5,000 acres. He had bought a farm when we
first moved to Crockett, which was... The farm was
adjacent to the one that he bought half interest in
in 1917. So he ran both the farms.
I stayed with him until 1921, from 1917 to 1921.
That year was a bad farming year. I had 100 acres in
cotton on my own, and I think I picked about three
bales. It rained every day. I raised beautiful
crabgrass and all that. Anyhow, I said, Dad, I'm
leaving. I wasn't going to school. The years that I
was on the farm, we were too far away from a school to
go, and I had dropped out there in Crockett. Well, I
was supposed to have gone into the eighth grade,
And I dropped out. So the people who owned the
remainder of the ranch, Dave Nunn and his sister,
Mrs. Curry, needed someone to help them. They had a
big home in Crockett, an old southern home, and had
15 cows that needed milking, a big yard, car, and
house to clean, and so on. I went there and they paid
me $10 a week and gave me my room and board and I
helped to milk the 15 cows morning and night and did
the yard work and everything else that needed to be
done around the place. How old were you at that
time? Well, this was in 1921. I was going on 18,
yeah, when I went there.
Can we talk for a minute about this rice farm? This
is very interesting to me. In 1917, your father's
rice farm? No. He was transferred to Port Arthur to
put in a lock down there to keep the water off of the
rice farm. Oh, okay. Then what kind of farm did he
have? Well, we had sort of a combination farm. We
had all cotton and corn, and we had cattle and hogs
and goats and such as that. And did you say 5,000
acres? Yeah, 5,000 acres in the Trinity River
bottom in Houston County. Oh, it extended from Old
Alabama Ferry, which is across from Centerville,
and on down, oh, I don't know, several miles on down
the river toward Old Claps Ferry. Now, did you
have... you had with your with your brothers did
you have could you take care of the work yourself on
the farm or did you have to hire out labor we had i
don't have any families we had on the place dad
built houses to for them and they lived and shared
crops and so on and whenever he needed them where
they did they labor for him oh i see so when i They're
both black and white. Both black and white. Yeah. I
guess we had around 20 families on the place,
something like that. But I went on school. Right.
OK. Now, let's start that. Your education. Let's
talk about your education in high school in
Crockett, Texas. What subjects did you like?
Well, I liked mathematics. I
liked mathematics, and I thought when I graduated
in 1924, when I graduated from high school, I
thought, well, electrical engineering was what I
wanted. Oh, I see. So I came to A&M and signed up for
double E. Oh, you did? Oh, yeah. Okay, that was
another. So that was when Dr. Bolton was head of the
department.
I stayed with it a year. My background in high
school was rather poor. I thought I had had no
chemistry. I had good math courses, but no
chemistry. And that was one of my big weaknesses at
A&M. I had an awful time in chemistry. Because in
those days, in the chemistry department, you were
begun with students like my roommate, who had been
to prep school. And he had had chemistry. And to
him, it was just sort of a laughing matter. To me,
the first examination at the end of the first week,
we had the lab quiz. Give the chemical formula for
the reagents on your desk. I didn't know what H2O
was. This NH4OH and HCl and H2SO4 didn't mean
anything to me. And so that's the way it was from
then on. And valence was something else. Dr.
Brayton tried to straighten me out on valence. You
can imagine a couple dancing, and now they have two
arms, and now they have three, and now they have
four. taking me a little fast. Yeah, right. I
stayed with it until almost the end of the
semester, just to get as much out of it as I could.
And two of the upperclassmen had already told me
that no one expects to pass chemistry the first
time they take it. And so, of course, I didn't
believe them. But anyway, the second semester, I I
didn't have chemistry. I took a course in plane
surveying in place of it. And at the end of that
first year, I changed over to biology.
I left. Why did you think you changed? Mathematics
was something that I didn't like at A&M. But you
liked it in high school. I loved it because I had a
lovely teacher. She was an older person. She was in
her 60s and an old maid. And she knew how to teach
mathematics. And I had plenty of time to study
after I got through milking.
But I did all right in mathematics until I got into
analytical geometry. And they lost me on a
parabola somewhere. I don't know. But there was an
old boy teaching that course who was a graduate of
University of Texas.
I don't know whether he had any love for the Aggies
or not, but anyway, he was one of these dry, sour
pussies, and whatever answer you gave just didn't
satisfy him at all. So I left it with him. There were
some things I liked. I liked descriptive geometry
and some other things, too. But my biology, I
thought, that's where I should be. The English
courses, I had no trouble with. I guess at A&M, I
made good grades in English all the way through and
was selected as a member of the Junto The
J-U-N-T-O's, this was a select group of English
students selected by Dr. or Mr. Thomas, Old Spot
Thomas, we called him, and Tommy Mayo, who was
librarian in the English department, an Oxford
graduate. Oh, really? And they invited this
select group of English students into their
different homes in the English department. So I
enjoyed it very much. But English to me has never
been a bugaboo that it is to most A&M students and
most students in general because of their poor
background. I often, I don't know how many times
I've talked to Tommy Mayo. Tommy, why do we have all
of this literature, all this reading and so on in
English at A&M and in other colleges as well? You
start off with composition and rhetoric and so on.
Why don't we begin with just plain old English
grammar? The only English grammar I had was in the
seventh grade. And at that age, it didn't mean
anything to me. What's a compound sentence or
complex or compound complex or simple sentence?
And usually at A&M, The only time a student knows
that he has a sentence, he finds a period. And
that's about it. I was, just as an aside, I visited
most of the courses in modern language. Oh, you
did? When was this? Oh, this was during my years as a
teacher. I had French and German and Russian, four
years and so on. Well, I was in German, in one German
class, and the professor, Mr. Stadelman, he was
from Hitler, Germany. He left there to get away
from Hitler. So he was here teaching German. He
asked one of the students, what is a gerund? And
this English student didn't know.
Since I was a visitor, I wasn't supposed to enter
into the conversation anyway. I just sat and
listened. The only person in the class who knew
what a gerund was was a Chinaman, a Chinese
student. Really? Told him what a gerund is.
Probably because he learned English overseas. He
learned his English. He learned grammar. Well,
that's been the case in A&M. And I think you can say
it's that way in all universities. They need a good
course in grammar, English grammar. But if they
ever got it in high school or grammar school,
probably they've forgotten it. And
consequently, most college students are poor
writers, poor spellers. Yeah, I know that from
correcting my essay exams. Very poor. Okay, so can
you tell me, can you describe the Corps back when
you were in the Corps in the mid-1920s at A&M? Yeah,
I can describe it very tersely. That's all right.
The first thing they told me is fish. You're here at
A&M now.
Yes, sir.
You give your ass to the upperclassmen and your
heart to God. That's what they told you? And that's
about the way it was. Really?
Well, I don't care. You have to. They'll hear you on
tape. That'll have to be deleted. But anyway...
No, but that was the idea. That was the idea. I was
about five years older than the average run of
students. I was going on 21 when I graduated from
high school. Yeah. So... That sort of thing didn't
set too well with me, all this hazing business, and
they did haze. And could you tell me about the
hazing? What types? Anything. Everything went.
For example? Well, anything they wanted to beat
your rear end with, they beat it with. The Polo,
Mallet, and what? And they didn't pull any
punches. Sam Brown belts and wire hangers pulled
out, coat hangers pulled out, split baseball
bats, anything that they had. And Dr. Bazell was
president then, and he had just come here from the
old CIA, and all the upperclassmen claiming he was
trying to put lace on their drawers because he was
trying to do away with hazing.
You were at the beck and call of the upperclassmen
24 hours a day. I don't care if it was in the middle of
the night and they wanted service, they got it. 2
o'clock in the morning, go over to the ice plane,
get a chunk of ice, I want some ice water. Or I'll be
in at 4 o'clock on the morning train, you meet me
there and pick up my suitcase. Really? Oh,
everything went. And... Your rear end was black,
and blue, and green, and yellow, and everything.
And finally, it got to be as hard as that wall, and
rigid, and just ridges on it from whatever they
beat you with. Or an architect's triangular
scale, you know what they are? Yeah, yeah. Right
here. Oh, yeah, they hurt. And you put your leg
across his, and he just starts, and you count. And
somewhere up there toward 100, while he loses, you
lose count, so he said. And he has to start all over
again. What was the rationale behind this
punishment? I often wondered. Yeah. I couldn't
see anything. Now, if I had misbehaved, if I were
undisciplined and so on, I could see where
somebody needed to give me some licks. But just for
it general purpose, no way. But by the time they got
through that architect's gale, there'd be a place
about the size of your hand, and it would be raised
up about as thick as your hand and be black. And when
you walked, it felt as if it would fall out. That
would take you several weeks to get over that. Or
they'd take a straight pen. and find a place that
was not sensitive. Really? And just start
pounding on that straight pin and driving on in. No
kidding. Yeah. I've had that done to my leg.
Oh, all manner of things that they did in those
days. Heaven help us. But I guess that was the way of
getting the Aggie spirit in you. But... Dr.
Bazell, of course, clamped down on the hazing.
Well, it got to where you weren't supposed to hit a
student with any kind of a board. But nothing was
said about exercise. Nothing was said about
exercise. So you could do leaning rest. And you
could sit on infinity. You know what sitting on
infinity is? Sitting on a board? No. Sitting on
that? The bayonet. The bayonet, and you squat
until you're seated on the point of that bayonet.
And then they take it out from under you, and you
have to maintain that stance. I mean, maintain it
until you fall. And by that time, sweat is running
out of every pore on your body. Or you stand, and you
do this way. Well, that goes all right for five or 10
minutes. But you just keep on until you can't. And
you can't even hold your arms out. And you're just
perspiring. You're wringing wet. Try that.
And fish calls, duty calls, and we had My roommate
and I, old Stacy Siler, that old big fat boy, and I
had two rooms to clean up. The major's room next
door and then an upperclassman's room around on
the other side. This was in old Milner Hall, second
floor. So
all kinds of duties. But I didn't mind that,
cleaning up somebody's room along with your own.
because, golly, I had been cleaning house for four
years through high school. That was one of my jobs
at the place where I was working. Clean house and
cook and wash dishes and anything else. Make the
fires in the morning, big old house. They had four
fireplaces and, golly, I don't have any cords of
wood that would burn in the wintertime anyway.
Cleaning rooms didn't bother me and the people The
fellas in those rooms were very nice. I did. One of
the fellas by the name of Gatlin is retired and at
College Station now. But Plebe Miller, the other
one who was rooming with Gatlin,
was expelled or, well, I guess he was suspended.
That freshman year, talking about hazing, In
order to get the freshmen in troop B cavalry on the
line and get them ready to go over to Austin, Texas
for Thanksgiving and play the University of Texas
in the new stadium, this was to be the first game. We
were going to initiate that field over there,
dedicate the stadium. So they had to get us on the
line. They took us on what they call a pecan hunt.
Way out in here somewhere, this was all backwoods
then, and they beat on us all Sunday afternoon. I
mean, anything they had. Well, old Plebe was
there, this Plebe Miller, was there, had a little
piece of window sash rope, a little cotton rope,
and he just tapped you a little bit, you know, you
didn't feel it. But anyway, 25 of our
upperclassmen were suspended. They were caught.
One of the fellas, the freshman, claimed he had an
injury to his tailbone. And so he went home. And his
father was in the state legislature. And they had
an investigation. Big deal. So 25 of the
upperclassmen in B Troop were suspended or
expelled. I don't know which. Anyway, Plebe was in
the group. But Plebe had been to Annapolis. And in
his sophomore year, he was expelled from
Annapolis for hazing. That's the reason they
called him Plebe.
So he went home. His family disowned him. His gal,
his girlfriend, quit him and all. And he came back
to A&M about the next week. I awakened one morning,
and Plebe was in my bunk with me, which was very
unusual for an upperclassman to be bunking up with
a a freshman, a fish, and in those little narrow
bunks. Well, he stayed around about a week and went
to Dallas and got him a room in a hotel and blew his
brains out. No kidding. Yeah. Killed himself on
that. Well, of course, we weren't very well
pleased with the way it was handled. The freshman,
in spite of all of the hazing and indecencies and
what have you that upperclassmen did. You would
give your right arm for an upperclassman. That was
the bond between you, because even though they did
haze you, they would do anything for you. But you
got discipline. And I mean plenty of it.
Did you haze when you became an upperclassman? No.
You didn't haze? No. I was against it. But I didn't
quit.
I took it. Right along with the others. No, I have a
picture I want to show you. It's just a negative,
but this is my roommate. I want to show you about
Hayden. You just sit there. I'll bring it to you. I
had a print of this one, but I think you can tell from
this negative, this was a black and white, you can
tell the condition of his rear end. Oh, my
goodness. He's had some boards go across that, it
looks like. Many of them. Many of them.
This was old Stacy, who later became an MD and a
surgeon. That was his rear end. Mine looked just
like it at that
time. Really something. You're going to have to
put in a positive.
I didn't realize it was that .
I wouldn't get somebody to be upset.
These
old boys here, both of these fellas, this was a
fella by the name of Durst. He was from Crockett.
Preacher, he was one of the Yale leaders in those
days. He was suspended along with that group. And
Buzz Gales was his roommate. They were both
suspended. This old boy Durst became one of the
vice presidents of Brown and Root. No kidding. He
left two president scholars for A&M when he died.
That's the love that they had for A&M, even though
they were treated that way. Well, how can you
account for that? That's really interesting. How
can you account for the fact that these people were
suspended and for the fact that you were hazed in
sometimes a brutal fashion, and yet the respect
and love for the institution is so profound?
That's right. I would think that some people might
be turned off by this. Well, they were. Some were
turned off and they left. I see. Or either if they
were misfits. I remember one boy who was a misfit.
We packed him up and...